This video is brought to you by brilliance of problem solving website and app
with a hands on approach,
check them out at brilliant.org/biographics more on them in a bit.
In the early 17th century,
a religious man decided he was going to uncover the architecture of the universe
itself using observations of the heavens and a deep understanding of geometry.
This man conjecture a world of harmonious design,
where the secrets of God's creation could be decipher by anyone willing to use
mathematics, to look for them. In the course of his quest,
this man managed to change our understanding of astronomy forever.
His name was Johan Keer and he would go down as one of the greatest scientists
to ever live born into a divided Europe.
Kepler grew up in a time of unfathomable change, witchcraft trials,
religious wared,
a scientific revolution were all pulling the consonant apart yet Kepler managed
to not just navigate through these changes,
but to do so while transforming science, he discovered laws of astronomy.
He changed our understanding of optics,
pioneered crystalography developed telescopes and even wrote what's likely the
first work of science fiction persecuted for his faith misunderstood in his
lifetime. This is the life of Johanne Kala.
The man who discovered the secrets of the,
When Johan's coupler was born in 1571,
it was into a Europe already reeling from two major revolutions,
half a century alley.
A man named Martin Luther had nailed his 95 thesis to a church door,
kicking off a century and a half of religious upheaval known
as the reformation. 26 years after that in 1543,
the astronomer Nicholas Copernicus had proved that the sun didn't orbit the
earth,
but rather the other way around triggering an even bigger upheaval known as the
scientific revolution. By the time Johan's couple of first open designs,
these twin revelations were causing Europe to strain at the seams,
not the Kless parents would've imagined that he could have lived long enough to
see those seams rip right open. The boy was weak.
He was sickly a prime candidate in those hard times for an early death ands
die. He nearly did before. He was even five Kalo came down with small parks,
a disease left his eyesight damaged and his hands unable to properly function.
Luckily though it didn't kill him and Kepler would live through his illness to
see the sight that would change his life.
The great comments of 1577 was so bright.
It made the whole of Europe stop and GOP up in the kingdom of Denmark.
The astronomer Tijo Brahe, who we are gonna meet again in just a moment,
watched the comment pass and knew that it would transform his life's work.
The young capital though, the great comment was even more important.
It was this event that would one day Mac into an astronomer,
but only after some false starts as a good Lutheran growing up in the holy Roman
empire, a collection of several hundred states, roughly analist modern Germany,
Kapler wasn't meant to be a mathematician when he enrolled at the university of
tubing and in 1589,
it was on the strict understanding that he would study theology,
become a pastor and help spread Luther's gospel.
The vs of this didn't happen is do you entirely to Michael Malin,
Malin is one of those figures. Basically no one today can name,
but who wounds up changing history? Kepler's mathematics.
Ju Mason was a private devote of Copernicus private because these were the days
when saying the sun didn't Abid.
The earth could end with the religious authorities using you as an unwilling
test subject for the shiny new thumbs screws.
But when Mason discovered Kepler loved astronomy,
he broke cover long enough to lend Copernicus's dere,
Orian Colion li V what Kepler read there blew his mind in Copernicus's
heliocentric universe. Kalo saw not Hery,
but the glimpses of God's harmonious design for Kepler.
This was the road to Damascus moments.
The revelation that changed everything from then on,
he devoted his life to studying the stars.
It was the start of a journey that would take him,
not just across the holy Roman empire,
but into more danger than this sickly teen could have ever believe possible.
In 1594, Johans Kepler received an unexpected letter.
Now 23 Kepler was on the verge of graduating university,
despite his devotion to astronomy.
He still planned to become a pastor because that's just what you did in the late
16th century.
The letter changed all of that sent from the Austrian city of grad sit invited
Kepler to come and work as a maths teacher. And just like that,
Kepler was able to throw his boring destiny away and to become the mathematician
had always dreamed of being well almost despite what the letter had promised.
Almost nobody in grads attended Kepler's clown.
He was forced to take a second job as a calendar maker just to survive,
but what Kepler's life in grads lacked in opportunities, success or happiness,
more than made up for with spare time,
spare time in which Kepler could ponder some of science's most pressing
mysteries before caper had come along and dynamite.
Thousands of years of human thinking was accepted that the planets were fixed to
the heavens and that the heavens rotated around the earth.
But now the Copernicus had shown that the earth was moving around. The sun,
all sorts of weird questions had arisen, clearly earth wasn't fixed to anything.
It was just kind of floating along so well. What made it float?
What made the other planets move?
It was while daydreaming in one of his near empty classes in 1595,
the Kepler felt a light bulb go ping right above his head.
If the planets had a regular orbit around the sun,
then surely this was because the sun itself was affecting them with some kind of
force today. We of course would call that force gravity.
But Kepler was living about 50 years before Isaac Newton was even a lustful
twinkle in his father's eye. So well, he called it magnetism still.
It was the very first time anyone in Europe had come even close to understanding
what made our solar system tick.
But Kepler went to even further than just puntificating about the sun.
Curious about the space between the planet.
See hypothesized that each gap must correspond to one of the platonic
solids, the Tetra Hedron cube,
Okta Hedron ISO Hedron and do DECA Hedron.
When his calculations seemed to bear this out,
he declared hit uncovered God's architecture.
So this might sound a little crooky to modern ears. I mean, magic shapes.
God's architecture. What? Well,
we need to remember the era Kepler was living in this was an era before pure
mathematics,
an era in which you could say the sun orbited the earth and not only have people
snicker at you, but then have them imprison your neighbor for disagreeing.
What Kepler's worked.
It was suggest the universe could be understood through maths,
that there was a scientific way of thinking about the heavens beyond simply
saying, God did it.
It is that simple thought that would turbocharge the scientific revolution.
Capital published his ideas in 1597.
The very same year he married his first wife.
Not long after he began writing to Tejo bra. Remember Brahe.
He was the Danish guy who saw the great comment and realized that it would
transform his career while Kepler became his penal,
just as bra was in the process of moving his work to Prague.
It was a relationship that would soon save Kepler's life. In 1599,
the religious tensions simmering across central Europe,
between Catholics and Lutherans boiled over in grants.
The city's Catholics barred against attacking Protestants for the Lutheran
Kepler. This was a, oh boy, better get outta here. Moment. The trouble was,
he had nowhere to go.
His religious buddies back at university had read his book and decided he was a
Copernicus loving heritage who wasn't allowed to hang out with him anymore.
Just as it was starting to look like Kepler might find himself being tar unto
feathered by angry Catholics, bra threw a lifeline. Hey, I've got a crazy idea.
You basically said, why didn't you come work for me in Prague?
And that's how in the dying days of the 16th century,
Johans coupler found himself joining the legendary court of Rudolph the seconds.
But before we get to what he did there,
I do want to take a moment to tell you about today's sponsor brilliance.
Brilliant is a problem solving website and app with a hands on approach.
They've got over 60 interactive courses in maths,
science and computer science on their platform.
You can use brilliant to achieve stem goals.
You get one little bit of information and learning at a time.
You're gonna expand your knowledge of the world through interactive puzzles,
brilliant courses teach you through storytelling,
interactive challenge and problem solving brilliance are always improving their
platform and there's brands, new interactive content recently,
including updates to their logic course,
as well as their course on mathematical fundamentals.
Or if you want something completely new brilliance of a course,
all about search engines,
which will teach you how search engines like Google work.
Basically they're behind the scenes,
how they find the information you need incredibly quickly from the billions of
websites out there.
Look brilliant is a great compliment to watching educational videos like this
one. And it will really help explain even complex and technical subjects.
So if you want us to support biographics and get unlimited access to all of
brilliance in depth, maths and science courses, head on over to
brilliant.org/biographics and get 20% off their annual premium subscription.
And let's get back to Kapler.
If you were alive and into spooky in 1600,
there was nowhere better to be than Rudolph the seconds. Prague,
the Roman emperor was obsessed with everything. A cult, the legendary Alchemist,
John D worked for him as did rabbi love. The man said to have created the go,
not that Rudolph distinguished between crackpot,
mysticism and actual science though. He supported alchemists and Astro,
but also astronomers and mathematicians.
And one of those astronomers just happened to bery.
Ry arrived in Prague the year before to take the title of Imperial
mathematician.
His mission was to undertake a new set of planetary observations and then create
a table from the results that could predict where anything in the night sky
would be on a future date. Such tables had existed before,
but they'd been plagued by poor data.
Brahe was determined to make the most accurate table in history. Unfortunately,
history is exactly what Brahe was about to become on October the 24th,
1601 Brahe died rather than halt his work Rud off the second simply handed it
Tory's assistance. This is how Kepler suddenly found himself,
not just saddled with the title of Imperial mathematician and the difficult jobs
to finish,
but also with access to the scientific equivalents of magic pixie dust in his
lifetime,
Bri had been a guy who didn't like to share among the things he didn't like
sharing, whereas astronomical observations, the most accurate in human history.
So when Kepler inherited bra his work,
he also got his hands on these observations.
This data would be the key that helps unlock Kepler's greatest discoveries for
the next decade. Kepler slaved away in Prague,
making new discoveries like a man possessed in 1604, for example,
is attempt to figure out the best way to observe an eclipse,
send him down a rabbit hole that ended in him discovering a how light travels
through the human eye. Remember in science glass,
when you found out that the human eye actually projects stuff onto your retinas
upside down and your brain flips the image the right way up again.
While Kepler was the first to discover that he then used this work to design
highly improved eyeglasses. The same year he was working on optics.
Kepler also became the first to observe what he, a new star in the sky.
Actually, we now know that it was the last recorded supernova in the Milky way.
Many years later, couple's observation would help improve that earth.
Isn't the center of the universe. A few years later in 1608,
he wrote Somnia more the dream in English,
possibly the first work of science fiction,
but it was the book Kepler published in 60 0 9. That really changed the world.
Astronom Nova grew out of Kepler's observation of Mars's orbit after tracing it
through the sky for years,
he finally clicked that the complex twisting trail that we see from earth is
also because earth is moving through space by deploying what in the 16 hundreds
must have, seems like an insane thought experiment.
Kepler managed to show what Earth's own orbit would look like from Mars.
From there,
it was just a small step to prove that Mars's orbit must be elliptical.
It was the first time that anyone had figured out what a planet's orbit actually
looked like. And it was from here that KA LA drew his first law,
that the planets have elliptical orbits with the sun as one of the Faki it's
also from here that he drew the second of his three laws,
which is pretty difficult to explain,
but basically gives you a way to measure the speed that any planet is traveling
around the sun as for the third law. Well, we'll get back to that in a bit.
When Kepler published these findings in Astron Nova in 1609,
he impressively included all his raw data today.
Something that's a given where sciences consent at the time though,
it was almost like a dare for its critics. A way for Kepler to say,
you think I'm wrong to you? Well, study the data and show me where I'm wrong.
The astronom and Nova was a monumental achievement.
One that cemented Kepler claimed a greatness. Unfortunately,
1609 was also the moment Kepler's world began to split apart.
Back in 1555,
the holy Roman empire had managed to stop the consonant exploding with something
called the piece of Augsburg Al and Luther did his thing.
The empire had transformed into a gigantic pressure cooker with Catholics and
Lutherans threatening to unleash holy war on one another.
The piece had released some of that pressure by removing the requirements for
states in the empire to be Catholic. Instead,
each territories ruler could choose for themselves whether to be Catholic or
Lutheran and no one else would, but the piece was just a temporary fix,
a quick release of some steam inside individual states.
Pressure was still rising as the growing popularity of Protestantism collided
with the often Catholic elite in Bohemia, the Catholic root of the second.
It tried to solve this by signing the letter of magistrate and attempt to
compromise. It allowed Bohemia Nobles to build their own churches and worship.
However, they wished,
unfortunately it was this very act of compromise that would ensure the pressure
cooker of Europe finally exploded into the 30 years war.
Martha Kepler really noticed any of this as the new decade dawned,
he was still beavering away in Prague, still making discoveries in 16, 10,
for example, Galle AO used the first telescope to discover Jupiter's moons, IO,
Calisto, Europa, and G meat. Now known as the Galilean moons.
Their existence was such a controversial discovery that most people simply
refused to believe it claiming the telescope must be causing optical illusions.
So Kepler sat down and wrote another book on optics,
which not only proved Galileo, couldn't be seeing things,
but also described how to build a vastly more powerful telescope.
If it's starting to sound as if Kepler could do just about anything he put his
mind do well. Yeah, haven't heard the half of it. The following winter, 16, 11,
he was inspired to do a short study of snowflakes.
Not only did he become the first person in history to observe that all
snowflakes are unique,
the resulting pamphlet has been called the earliest work on crystalography.
And if you are feeling like an under retriever right now, well,
you're not alone <laugh> but even as Kepler kept churning out discovery after
discovery, storm clouds were gathering on the horizon.
The same year that Kepler was writing about snowflakes Rudolph's younger brother
Mateus forced the emperor to abdicate at sword point from the moment he took the
throne,
the hardcore Catholic Matt Mateus made it clear that he wasn't going to honor
any letters, giving legal rights to Protestant scum.
Suddenly the Lutheran Kepler was living in a city that officially hated
Lutherans. It was grants two point do. And once again, Kepler had no way out.
As 16, 12 got underway.
Keer began searching frantically for an exit from Prague.
He wrote again to his old university, but they were like, dude,
you wrote that the earth orbits the sun. That's crazy. If we hire you,
people are gonna think we are crazy, right? If that wasn't bad enough,
that same year Kepler's wife died of spotted fever.
Justice Kepler was getting desperate. The city of ly came to his rescue.
They would create the position of district mathematician just for him provided.
He used his time in the city to finish Bri's tables with no other options,
Kepler accept it. He got out just in time. Five years later in 16,
17 Prague cracked down hard on its Protestants. Judges opened under Rudolph.
The second were closed. non-Catholics were subjected to harassment for a year.
The Protestants tried to put up with these indignities. Then in 16, 18,
they finally snapped on may the 23rd group of Protestants stormed Prue castle
grabbed three Catholics and hold them out of a high window.
The deepest of Prague in is famous today. Novo's death toll,
all three Catholics survived after landing in a pile of manure,
but it's famous for what it started.
The deepen was the opening salvo in the 30 years,
war three decades of religious violence that would destroy central Europe and
leave over 8 million people dead.
And Johans Kepler was about to get a court right in the middle of it.
If we were to try and explain the 30 years war,
it would take about well 30 years and leave us all with really sore brains to
put it in its crudes terms.
Just note that it was a religious war that quickly grew beyond religion and
would ultimately not just the many states of the holy Roman empire,
but also France, Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands Polands, the Ottoman empire,
the Habsburg lands, England, Scotland, Russia,
and pretty much any nation that happened to be passing by and felt like joining
in the Royal rumble. Now when, because the war was so big,
so long and so vicious,
it also created the ideal conditions for the outbreak of a plague,
which in turn created the ideal conditions for witchcraft panics,
which in turn led to some of the largest mass executions for witchcraft in human
history. So yeah, 30 years war,
not exactly a fun time to be alive in central sadly though,
central Europe was exactly where Kepler was by 16,
19 Linz like grads and Prague before it was paralyzed by anti Protestant riots.
As a guest of the city,
Kepler was allowed to stay and he and his new family had married local last
Susan rooting us soon after arriving in 16, 13, and now they had three children.
They were officially protected, but unofficially unofficially,
the family had to deal with prejudice every single day in such circumstances.
It's almost a wonder that Kepler got any work done at all yet.
Somehow he managed that same year. Kepler published his third law,
which states that squaring the length of any planets orbits. In other words,
the length of its year and dividing that by its distance from the sun hub will
return a constant number. It was a powerful mathematical insight,
but it was also overshadowed by events in Kepler's life.
Remember the book Somon that Kepler published back in 60 0 8,
the one we said might be their first work of science fiction,
where we didn't mention it at the time, but Somon includes a little side story.
One about a son who is a scientist and a mother who is a witch in 16,
20 life began imitating Kepler's art in the darkest possible way
that year Kepler's own mother was imprison for witchcraft witchcraft accusations
during the 30 years war, certainly not something to be taken lightly.
This was the same era as the worst Berg witch trials,
in which hundreds of people were burned at the Kepler knew he had to save his
mother.
So he dropped what he was doing and returns at once to organize that defense,
the resulting trial would eat up over a year of his life.
To hear the story now is actually all sorts of impressive.
Kepler approached the case like he did as scientific work,
using a deep analysis of the raw documents to forensically examine.
The prosecution's claims is a battle between science and superstition,
a case in which one side used rational arguments.
While the other talked about demons and women turning themselves into cats,
incredibly science actually won after 14 months manacled in her cell.
The threat of torture looming over her capital's mother was set free.
Thanks entirely to our son's efforts for a, for rationality.
This was a huge victory, but it was one that came at a price for over a year.
Keer scientific work had been put on hold.
The trial had also left him in dire need of money, money.
The city of Lynns wasn't willing to pay not long after the trial ended Kepler's
Lynn's home was requisitions and turned into a troop Garrison in 1625,
the Catholics were running.
The city confiscated his entire library and forced his children to start
attending mass. Finally in 1626, Kepler and his family,
they left Blands for good, but now they were broke.
And on the verge of destitution ever,
the optimist Kepler tried heading back to Prague and asking the treasury for
unpaid wages that Rud off the second at OIN,
that they simply laughed him outta the city. It was a bleak time,
not just for Kepler, but for the whole of Europe,
but the astronomer wasn't done yet.
He still had one last moment of greatness to come.
It had been 1599 when Rudolph II first called Brahe to his court to prepare new
astronomical tables.
This was years before Kepler described his three laws years before his discovery
of Mars' orbit before the defen of Prague before the 30 years war in that
time, bra and Rudolph had both died and the consonant had split apart,
but Kepler hadn't forgotten what he was meant to be doing.
He hadn't forgotten the promise that he had made so long ago in 1627,
Kepler finally published bris,
finished tables known today as the Rudolph tables,
they were the most accurate tables for predicting the movement of the planets in
human history. They were based not just on bras, jealously guarded data,
but also on Kepler's own observations. In fact,
his three laws were baked into the tables.
Underlying every calculation that Kepler had performed, if his laws were real,
the predictions in the tables would be born out.
And luckily there was a major one coming up that everyone could check them
against. In 1631, mercury was scheduled to transit across the sun.
Sadly for our story,
wouldn't live to see himself vindicated on November the 15th, 16,
30 Ahan Keer passed away in the city of Regensburg around in the 30 years,
war continued to rage a pointless. How of destruction consuming Europe,
even in death, Kepler wouldn't escape it. At some point,
a rampaging army destroyed the cemetery.
He was buried in the location of his body. It's now lost to history,
but even as Europe to itself apart,
the first Ray of hope were beginning to glimmer in 1631,
mercury completed its transit across the sun.
Exactly as Keplers tables had predicted with Kepler's work clearly on the mark,
it started raising questions.
One of which would eventually come to greatly trouble,
a young British man about 50 years later, long after the 30 years war,
it finally ended. Isaac Newton found himself pondering capitalist tables.
If it were possible to predict the movements of the planet. So accurately,
there must be some sort of force guiding them.
Newton disagreed with capitalist theory about a magnetic son.
So he said about discovering just what this mysterious force might be from.
These musings would come. The discovery of gravity,
a wild is influence on Newton. Maybe Kepler's biggest claims of fame.
There are other ways that his work lasted.
Just take a look at Kepler's conjecture, a 16,
11 theory on the stacking of cannonballs that wasn't proved until 1998,
nearly 400 years later.
But perhaps the most important aspect of Kepler work is the thinking that
underlay it all.
Kepler was one of the first to look at the night sky and not see some unknowable
mechanism at work,
but a divine plan that was both beautiful and capable of being understood by
humans.
While Kepler may have been more explicitly religious than most scientists today,
he even actually referred to himself as a prophet. At one point,
that idea of a universal language of an existence we can understand through
mathematics is still very relevant.
Kepler may have died before he could see his life's work be proved, right,
but his name will continue to echo across for centuries to come.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below.
Do not forget to subscribe brand new videos four days a week. Also.
Why not check out another channel? I do. It's called highlight history.
It's sort of a today in history thing. I'm gonna link to that below.
There's always. Thank you for watching.